                       1




   DAILY
CLASS NOTES
      BPSC
 MODERN HISTORY

     Lecture – 08
 European Company 05




        BPSC
                                                                                            2




                                 European Company 05

British Company
❖   John Mildenhall was the first British merchant to travel by land to India (in 1599).
    In 1603 he reached Lahore and also visited Akbar's court. Mildenhall is also known as
    the first Englishman to be buried in India. His tomb is in Agra.
❖   The original company was established in the year 1600 under the name "Governor
    and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East Indies".
❖   On 31 December 1600, this company was granted a charter of 15 years by the
    then Queen Elizabeth I of Britain to trade with the East.
❖   In 1668, the company received Bombay from the British Prince Charles II. Although
    Gerald Aungier is considered the founder of the city of Bombay, this statement is
    partially correct. Aungier played an important role in developing Bombay as a major
    commercial center in the 17th century.
❖   In 1688, the company established a municipal corporation in Madras.
❖   In 1698, a rival East India company was formed, known as the "General Society
    Trading to the East Indies". This company was formed to compete with the original
    East India Company.
❖   The two companies were later combined in 1708 to form The Limited Company of
    Merchants of England Trading into the East Indies.
❖   The Charter Act of 1833 changed the name of the East India Company from "East
    India Company" to "British East India Company". This act further centralised the
    company's governance and strengthened British rule in India.
Indian rulers and British factory :-
❖   Elizabeth died in 1603 and 'James I' became the king of Britain. He maintained the
    rights given to the British East India Company.
❖   The British tried to open a trading factory in Surat and for this permission was
    taken from the British emperor.
❖   The British had three ships in their sea voyage. The first was 'Red Dragon', the
    second was 'Consent' and the third ship was named 'Hector'. The captain of the
    Hector ship was William Hawkins.
❖   William Hawkins reached Surat port on 24 August 1608 as the envoy of King James
    I of England.


                                          BPSC
                                                                                             3




❖   Hawkins knew Turkish and Persian languages. After reaching Jahangir's court, he
    conversed in Turkish. Jahangir gave Hawkins a mansab of 400 and the title of
    'English Khan'.
❖   In 1608, the British opened their first trading house in Surat which was temporary.
❖   In 1611, the British opened the first house in Masulipatnam. This was the first
    British factory in South India.
❖   In 1613, the British opened their permanent factory in Surat.
❖   On 18 September 1615, Sir Thomas Roe reached Surat, where he entered the court
    of Jahangir as an envoy of the English king James I. In 1616, he reached Ajmer,
    where Jahangir was holding court at that time. It was in Ajmer that he met
    Jahangir and sought permission for a trade treaty.
❖   The British received a “golden decree” from the Sultan of Golconda in 1632 and
    received facilities in return.
❖   In 1633, the British established their first factory in eastern India at Balasore in
    Odisha.
❖   The British had a factory in Tellicherry (Kerala) on the Malabar coast. Tillicherry is
    still known for black pepper.
❖   In 1639, Francis Day acquired Madras from the ruler of Chandragiri and built “St.
    George Fort” there. The founder of Madras city was Francis Day.
❖   In 1651, the first British factory was opened in Hooghly in Bengal under Bridgeman
    and here the British received trade facilities from Shah Shuja in exchange for ₹3000
    annually.
❖   In 1686, the British had a dispute with Aurangzeb over the fortification of Bengal
    and after being defeated by Aurangzeb, the British fled to Fever Island.
❖   Aurangzeb is the first Mughal emperor who successfully conducted the Mughal
    campaign against the British.
❖   In 1795, the Dutch surrendered Cochin to the East India Company.
❖   In 1698, the British received the subedari of Sutanuti, Kolikata and Govindpur
    villages from the then Subedar of Bengal Azimushshan at the rate of ₹1200 annual
    rent. By combining these places, Job Charnock founded Calcutta and named it “Fort
    William”.



                                          BPSC
                                                                                         4




❖   The first President of Fort William was Charles Eyre. In 1717, during the reign of
    Farrukhsiyar, a delegation headed by British officer John Surman came which
    included Edward Stephens, a physician named William Hamilton and an interpreter
    named Khwaja Sehurd.
❖   William Hamilton cured Farrukhsiyar of a fatal boil.
❖   This delegation was given a “Shahi Farman” by the Mughal ruler Farrukhsiyar under
    which the British got the freedom to trade in Bengal in exchange for ₹3000
    annually.
❖   The British historian Orme called this Farman the ‘Magna Carta of the Company’.



                                             




                             PW Web/App: https://smart.link/7wwosivoicgd4




                                           BPSC
