                      1




   DAILY
CLASS NOTES
      BPSC
 MODERN HISTORY

    Lecture – 10
  Carnatic War - 02




        BPSC
                                                                                             2




                                  Carnatic War - 02

Second Carnatic War (1749-1754)
❖   Reason :-
    ➢ Succession struggle between Carnatic and Hyderabad.
    ➢ In Carnatic, there was a dispute between French supporter Chanda Sahib
       (brother-in-law of Anwaruddin) and British supporter Anwaruddin over the
       throne, while in Hyderabad, there was a succession struggle between British
       supporter Nasir Jung (son of Chinclich Khan) and French supporter Muzaffar Jung
       (nephew of Nasir Jung).
❖   Dupleix was leading the French side at this time too.
❖   The British army in the Second Carnatic War was led by Robert Clive.
❖   Decisive Battle :- Battle of Ambur (3 August 1749)
    ➢ In this war, the trio of Muzaffar Jung, Chanda Sahib and the French army killed
       Anwaruddin of Carnatic and removed Nasir Jung of Hyderabad from the throne.
❖   In December 1750, Nasir Jung also died in a conflict. After this, Muzaffar Jung
    became the governor of Deccan. But this governorship was short-lived. Because
    Muzaffar Jung died in a conflict in February 1751.
❖   During Muzaffar Jung's governorship, Dupleix had deployed a French army led by
    Bussy in Hyderabad.
❖   Chanda Sahib became the Nawab of Karnataka in 1751.
❖   After the death of Chanda Sahib, the British made Anwaruddin's son Muhammad Ali
    Khan the Nawab of Carnatic.
❖   After the death of Anwaruddin, Muhammad Ali Khan took refuge in the fort of
    Tiruchinapalli which was surrounded by Chanda Sahib and the French army.
❖   To protect Tiruchirappalli, Robert Clive captured Arcot, the capital of Carnatic, with
    the help of only 200 soldiers. Chanda Sahib's army of 4000 could not recapture
    Arcot for 53 days. In November 1751, this French-backed army was forced to
    surrender.
❖   Later in 1752, Raja Pratap Singh of Tanjore killed Chanda Sahib.
❖   In June 1752, the English army led by Stringer Lawrence saved Tiruchinapalli.
❖   Dupleix was called back to France and Godeheu was made the French governor in his
    place.


                                          BPSC
                                                                                              3




❖   Ceasefire Treaty :- Treaty of Pondicherry
    ➢ This war ended with the Treaty of Pondicherry in 1754.
❖   J. R. Marriott said about Dupleix that "Dupleix made a terrible mistake by looking for
    the key to India's victory in Madras, Clive found it in Bengal."
Third Carnatic War (1758-1763)
❖   Reason :-
    ➢ It was the result of the Seven Years' War (1756-1763) in Europe.
❖   During the war, Lally captured the British colony Fort St. David near Pondicherry
    and attacked Tanjore because it owed about 56 lakh rupees. But Lally failed to
    conquer Tanjore.
❖   Decisive Battle :- Battle of Wandiwash
    ➢ The Battle of Wandiwash was fought between the British and the French in India
       on 22 January 1760.
    ➢ In this war, the French army was led by Comte de Lally and the British army
       was led by Sir Eyre Coote.
    ➢ During the war, French officer Bussy was taken prisoner of war.
    ➢ In this war, the British defeated the French decisively, which helped in establishing
       British dominance in India.
    ➢ After the war, the British took control of Pondicherry, Mahe and Gingee in 1761.
❖   Truce Treaty :- Treaty of Paris
    ➢ In 1763, the “Treaty of Paris” was signed between Britain and France and this
       war ended.
Arrival of European traders in Bihar :-
❖   European traders first started arriving in Bihar in the 17th century. At that time,
    Bihar was considered a major place for obtaining saltpeter (saltpeter or potassium
    nitrate).
❖   The main reason for the attraction of colonial powers towards the region of Bihar
    was saltpeter, the trade of which offered ample profit potential to European
    companies.
❖   Portuguese traders first arrived in Bihar. The trading center of the Portuguese was
    Hooghly (in present-day West Bengal) from where they used to travel to Patna by
    boat.
❖   The Portuguese used to buy carpets, poppy seeds and thin cotton clothes from Bihar
    and in return brought spices and porcelain utensils etc.

                                           BPSC
                                                                                               4




❖   The Dutch factory was established in Patna in 1632. The Dutch factory was the
    building in the northern part of the present Patna College. The Dutch originally came
    to Bihar to obtain cotton clothes, grains and saltpeter.
❖   After the Dutch traders, the British company arrived in Bihar. Initially in 1620, the
    British tried to establish their trade centre in Alamganj. At that time, the governor
    of Bihar was Mubarak Khan. He arranged for the British to stay, but the factory was
    closed in 1621.
❖   Finally, in 1651, a British factory was opened in Government Printing Press,
    Gulzarbagh.
❖   Initially, the British were interested in cotton cloth, grain and saltpeter. But later
    their attraction towards the production of indigo increased. The then governor of
    Bihar, Shaista Khan, imposed a 35 percent tax on the trade of the English company
    in 1680, which angered Job Charnock and he looted the city of Hooghly in 1686. In
    1717, due to an agreement between the two parties, Farrukhsiyar again granted
    the British the freedom to trade in this region. During this period, the company
    started the practice of bribery in trade.
❖   A Danish factory was established in 1774 near Nepali Kothi in Patna City.
❖   Golghar was built by the British to store grain to deal with the problem of famine.
❖   Golghar is a huge granary built by Captain John Garstin in 1786 for the British
    Army after the terrible impact of the famine of 1770.
❖   It is a pillarless structure with a wall of 3.6 meters thickness and a base height of 29
    meters. Golghar has a total of 145 stairs.


                                          




                                           BPSC
                                                                                                                    5




                                                   BPSC
                                   MODERN HISTORY
                                                                                                  DMP - 08
                                          Model Answer
1.   Give details of the second war of Carnatic.                                                      (8 Marks)
     Ans:-

     Approach:-
     ❖   Introduction:- In this, we have to write about the background of the second Carnatic War.
     ❖   Main Body:- In this, we have to write about the second Karnataka war.
     ❖   Conclusion:- Conclude the answer by writing a concise conclusion.

     Background:
     ❖ The foundation of the Second Carnatic War was laid due to the Anglo-French rivalry in India. Even after
       the end of the First Carnatic War, there was no peace in India for a long period. In the year 1748, Nizam-
       ul-Mulk, the Mughal governor of Deccan and semi-independent Nawab of Hyderabad, died. After the
       death of Nizam, the struggle for succession started and both the British and the French presented their
       candidature on this, which became the cause of controversy.
     ❖ French Governor Dupleix, who had successfully led French forces in the First Carnatic War, attempted
       to increase his power and French political influence in South India by intervening in local dynastic
       disputes to defeat the British. As a result, the Second Carnatic War lasted from 1749 to 1754 and the
       British strengthened their position in South India.
     Causes of War:
     ❖ The occasion arose from the death of Nizam-ul-Mulk, the founder of the independent state of
       Hyderabad, in the year 1748 and the release by the Marathas of Chanda Sahib, son-in-law of Dost Ali,
       the Nawab of Karnataka, in the same year. The installation of the Nizam's son Nasir Jung on the throne
       of Hyderabad was opposed by the Nawab's great grandson Muzaffar Jung, who laid claim to the throne
       of Hyderabad saying that the Mughal Emperor had appointed him as the Governor of Hyderabad.
     ❖ Additionally in the south there were two candidates for the post of Nawab of the Carnatic, a subsidiary
       post which was officially dependent on the Nizam. Anwar-ud-din was appointed Nawab of Carnatic in
       the year 1743 after Nizam-ul-Mulk was forced to intervene to restore order in the province. Anwar-ud-
       din was one of the officers of the Nizam. Chanda Saheb was angry at the appointment of Anwar-ud-din.
       Chanda Saheb was the son-in-law of Dost Ali (1732–39), a former Nawab of Karnataka.
     ❖ The French supported the claims of Muzaffar Jung and Chanda Sahib in the Deccan and Karnataka
       respectively, while the British supported Nasir Jung and Anwar-ud-Din.




                                                    BPSC
                                                                                                             6



Result of the War:
❖ The combined forces of Muzaffar Jung, Chanda Sahib and the French defeated and killed Anwar-ud-din
  in the battle of Ambur (near Vellore) in the year 1749. The Nawab was killed in the battle and left his
  son Mohammad Ali as the heir to claim the title of Nawab.
❖ Muzaffar Jung was installed as the Nizam of Hyderabad and Subedar of the Deccan and Dupleix was
  appointed the governor of all the Mughal territories south of the Krishna River. The areas around
  Puducherry and some areas on the Orissa coast (including Masulipatnam) were also handed over to the
  French.
❖ However, after a few months, Muzaffar Jang was assassinated and the French installed Muzaffar Jang's
  uncle Salabat Jang as the new Nizam.
❖ Robert Clive of the East India Company (the first British administrator of the Bengal Presidency)
  proposed a diversionary attack on Saunders, the Governor of Madras, after he failed to provide effective
  support to Mohammed Ali at Trichinopoly. He suggested a sudden guerrilla attack on Arcot (the capital
  of Karnataka) to relieve military pressure on Trichinopoly, in which the British won. After fighting
  many wars, Mohammad Ali killed Chanda Sahib and later became the Nawab of Karnataka.
Result:
❖ French authorities were troubled by huge financial losses due to Duple's policy, so in the year 1754 it
  was decided to recall him.
❖ The duple was replaced by Charles Robert Godeheu as the French Governor-General in India.
❖ Godeheu adopted a policy of negotiation with the British and signed the Treaty of Puducherry with
  them, under which the British and the French agreed not to interfere in the disputes between the native
  princely states.
❖ Additionally, each party restored the status of its occupied territories at the time of the treaty.
❖ It became clear that the support of Indian power was not necessary for European success, rather the
  Indian power itself was becoming dependent on European support. Mohammad Ali in Karnataka and
  Salabat Jung in Hyderabad became rivals instead of each other's patrons.


                                                   




                                  PW Web/App: https://smart.link/7wwosivoicgd4




                                                 BPSC
