                   1




   DAILY
CLASS NOTES
     BPSC
 MODERN HISTORY

    Lecture – 09
    Carnatic War




       BPSC
                                                                                           2




                                       Carnatic War

Anglo-French Rivalry in The Carnatic




❖   Historical Background:- The historical background of the Carnatic Wars in the Indian
    context has been the rivalries between Britain and France going on since the Middle
    Ages.
❖   The three Carnatic Wars that took place in India from the middle of the eighteenth
    century can be seen in the context of this rivalry.
❖   Circumstances:- At this time the main office of the French was in Pondicherry and
    their sub-offices were in Masulipatnam, Karaikal, Mahe, Surat and Chandranagar.
    On the other hand, the main settlements of the British were in Madras, Bombay and
    Calcutta and there were many sub-offices.
First Carnatic War (1746-1748)
❖   In this war, the French side was led by Dupleix while the British commander Major
    Stringer Lawrence was leading the British army.
Main reason for the war:-
❖   In Europe, France and Britain became embroiled in the War of the Austrian
    Succession.
Immediate cause of the war:-
❖   Capture of French ships by British officer Captain Bernot.
Events of the war:-
❖   Dupleix sought help from the French governor La Bourdonnais in Mauritius.
❖   La Bourdonnais surrounded the Coromandel coast with 3000 soldiers and defeated
    the English navy.

                                           BPSC
                                                                                            3




❖   The British factory of Madras was surrounded by the French from both land and
    water. Finally Madras surrendered on 21 September 1746. Clive was also among the
    prisoners of war.
❖   La Bourdonnais returned Madras to the British after taking a good amount of
    money. But Dupleix did not accept this and he won Madras again.
❖   Dupleix failed to capture Fort St. David, which is located just 18 miles south of
    Pondicherry.
Decisive Battle:- Battle of St. Thome (4 November 1746)
❖   This battle was fought between the French army and the Indian army led by Nawab
    Anwaruddin of Carnatic (1744-49).
❖   The reason for the fight was the victory of Madras by the French.
❖   The Nawab, seeing the two companies fighting, ordered them to stop the war and
    not disturb the peace of the country.
❖   Dupleix had proposed to win Madras and give it to the Nawab. But when Dupleix did
    not fulfill his promise, the Nawab sent his army to get his demand accepted.
❖   A small French army under Captain Paradise, which had 230 French and 700
    Indian soldiers, defeated the Indian army of 10,000 under the leadership of Mahfooz
    Khan at the place of Saint Thome situated on the Adyar river.
❖   This victory of Captain Paradise made clear the superiority of the foreign European
    disciplined army over the loose and unorganized Indian army.
Ceasefire Treaty:- Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle
❖   In 1748, the Treaty of “Aix-la-Chapelle” was signed between Britain and France in
    Europe and the First Carnatic War ended.
❖   Under the treaty, the French returned Madras to the British but in return they got a
    region of America.
Note:- The War of Austrian Succession was a major conflict that lasted from 1740 to
1748, which started on the issue of succession in the Austrian Habsburg monarchy. After
the death of Charles VI, ruler of Austria, his daughter Maria Theresa claimed the throne,
but this was challenged by several European powers, sparking war.


                                            




                                            BPSC
                                                                                                                    4




                                                  BPSC
                                   MODERN HISTORY
                                                                                                  DMP - 07
                                           Model Answer
1.   Write a short note on the First Carnatic War.                                                      (8 Marks)
     Ans:-

     Approach:-
     ❖   Introduction:- Write about the background of the Carnatic War.
     ❖   Main Body:- Write about the Carnatic War.
     ❖   Conclusion:- Conclude the answer by writing a concise conclusion.

     The historical background of the Carnatic Wars in the Indian context is the rivalry between Britain and
     France that dates back to the Middle Ages. The three Carnatic Wars that took place in India from the mid-
     eighteenth century can be seen within the context of this rivalry.
     In the 1740s, Britain and France clashed over Austrian succession in Europe. In India, their trading
     companies, the British East India Company and the French East India Company, were rivals. With the
     outbreak of war in Europe, their hostility spread to India.
     Main cause of the war:
     ❖ IIn Europe, conflict erupted between France and Britain over the Austrian Succession.
     The immediate cause of the war:
     ❖ The seizure of French ships by British officer Captain Bernot.
     Major events
     ❖ Dupleix sought help from the French governor La Bourdonnais in Mauritius.
     ❖ La Bourdonnais surrounded the Coromandel coast with 3000 soldiers and defeated the English navy.
     ❖ The British factory of Madras was surrounded by the French from both land and water. Finally Madras
       surrendered on 21 September 1746. Clive was also among the prisoners of war.
     ❖ La Bourdonnais returned Madras to the British after taking a good amount of money. But Dupleix did
       not accept this and he won Madras again.
     ❖ Dupleix failed to capture Fort St. David, which is located just 18 miles south of Pondicherry.
     Decisive Battle: Battle of St. Thome (4 November 1746)
     ❖ This battle was fought between the French army and the Indian army led by Nawab Anwaruddin of
       Carnatic (1744-49).
     ❖ The reason for the fight was the victory of Madras by the French.
     ❖ The Nawab, seeing the two companies fighting, ordered them to stop the war and not disturb the peace
       of the country.



                                                    BPSC
                                                                                                               5



❖ Dupleix had proposed to win Madras and give it to the Nawab. But when Dupleix did not fulfill his
  promise, the Nawab sent his army to get his demand accepted.
❖ A small French army under Captain Paradise, which had 230 French and 700 Indian soldiers, defeated
  the Indian army of 10,000 under the leadership of Mahfooz Khan at the place of Saint Thome situated on
  the Adyar river.
❖ This victory of Captain Paradise made clear the superiority of the foreign European disciplined army
  over the loose and unorganized Indian army.
Result
❖ The war ended in Europe with the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748).
❖ According to this treaty, the French returned Madras to the British, and in return France got some
  territories in America.
❖ The war did not lead to a permanent solution, but it increased French strategic power and Dupleix's
  ambitions in India.
❖ The First Carnatic War marked the beginning of a struggle for supremacy between European powers in
  India. It made it clear that the struggle between the British and the French would play a decisive role in
  future Indian politics.


                                                 




                                PW Web/App: https://smart.link/7wwosivoicgd4




                                               BPSC
