                       1




   DAILY
CLASS NOTES
      BPSC
 MODERN HISTORY

     Lecture – 07
 European Company 04




        BPSC
                                                                                            2




                                 European Company 04

Dutch Company
❖   In 1595–1596, the first Dutch fleet, led by Cornelis de Houtman, sailed east. This
    fleet came towards the spice islands of Indonesia, not directly to India. In 1596,
    Houtman traveled to Sumatra and Bantam.
❖   The main purpose of this expedition was to reach the spice islands of Indonesia, not
    directly to India.
❖   The United East India Company of the Netherlands (Dutch East India Company) was
    founded in 1602, originally named the Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie (VOC).
❖   The company was established by the States-General of the Netherlands and was
    granted a 21-year trading monopoly in Asia. It is considered the world's first
    multinational corporation and the first company to issue stock.
❖   The Dutch East India Company was founded in 1602, but their first factory in India
    was established in 1605 at Masulipatnam (present-day Andhra Pradesh).
❖   The Dutch companies worked on the basis of joint capital.
❖   The company made all treaties in the name of the Dutch government.
❖   The Dutch initially took interest in the spice trade and then in the cloth trade.
❖   In 1619 the Dutch conquered Jakarta and established a city called Batavia there.
Dutch settlements:-
❖   Masulipatnam (Machilipatnam):- In 1605 (The first Dutch settlement was established
    in Masulipatnam in 1605.)
❖   Pulicut:- In 1610
❖   Surat:- In 1616
❖   Pipli:- In 1627 (The Dutch East India Company established its first factory in Bengal
    in 1627 at Pipli.)
❖   Bimlipatam:- In 1641
❖   Chinsurah:- In 1653 (Chinsurah became a more powerful Dutch trade center in
    1653. The Dutch built a fort named Gustavul here.)
❖   Cochin:- 1663
❖   In 1690, the Dutch shifted their headquarters from Pulicat to Nagapattinam.
Dutch trade in India:-
❖   The Dutch traded cotton, indigo, silk, rice and opium with India.


                                          BPSC
                                                                                            3




❖   The Dutch exported heavily from the Coromandel coast.
❖   The Dutch made Indian cloth a major export item.
❖   The Dutch introduced their gold-made “Pagoda” coin in Pulicat.
Competition of the Dutch with other European companies:-
❖   The Dutch virtually expelled the Portuguese from maritime trade in India. But they
    could not stand before the naval power of the British.
❖   The Dutch were defeated by the British in the “Battle of Bedara” in 1759. The
    Battle of Bedara was fought between British and Dutch forces on 25 November
    1759. This war took place in Bengal, and the British defeated the Dutch decisively in
    it. After this war, the influence of the Dutch in India diminished and they moved to
    Indonesia.
❖   The Battle of Bedara is also known as the Battle of Chinsura. This war was the result
    of trade competition between the British and the Dutch. The Dutch had worked
    together with Nawab Mir Jafar to oust the British and strengthen their position in
    Bengal.
❖   In 1795, the British invaded the Dutch Republic following the French Revolution and
    began taking over Dutch colonies.
❖   In 1795, the British took over the Dutch settlements on the Malabar coast, but this
    was not the final departure of the Dutch from India.
❖   In 1824–25, the British annexed the last of the Dutch trading centres to the English
    East India Company.
Danish Company
❖   The Danish East India Company came to India in 1616.
❖   The first Danish factory was established in Tranquebar (Tamil Nadu) in 1620. They
    built a fort (Fort Dansborg) in Tranquebar.
❖   The second factory was built in Serampore (Bengal) in 1676. Serampore was the
    headquarters of the Danes in India.
❖   In the 17th century, the town of Cossimbazar, under the supervision of the Danes,
    was the largest producer of silk thread.
❖   Initially, the Danes had trading competition with the Portuguese. But they left India
    in 1745.
❖   The Danes were the first European company to leave India.



                                          BPSC
                                                                                               4




French Company
❖   It was established in 1664.
❖   It was the last European company to come to India.
❖   During the time of Louis 14th (1643-1715, dynasty - Bourbon) the French East
    India Company i.e. 'Compagnie Indes Orientales' was established with the help of
    Prime Minister Colbert. It was a state controlled company.
❖   In 1667 the first French expedition team came to India under the leadership of
    Francis Carro.
Major French Settlements:-
❖   In 1668 Francois Caron established the first French factory in Surat.
❖   In 1669 the second French factory was built in Masulipatnam by Marcara.
❖   The French acquired Chandranagar of Bengal from the then Nawab of Bengal Shaista
    Khan and here in 1673 they established a factory. In 1690 a fort named "Fort
    Orientales" was built here.
❖   In 1674, the French acquired a village named Pondicherry from the Sultan of
    Bijapur and a prosperous city was established here by Frank Martin, which later
    emerged as the main centre of the French in India.
❖   Frank Martin was the first governor of Pondicherry.
❖   Frank Martin had accepted the subordination of Shivaji.
❖   The French colony was established in Mauritius in 1721.
❖   The French factory in Yanam was established in 1723. In 1723, the French
    company established a trading post here, although it was vacated in 1727, as the
    expected results were not obtained. In 1731, during the reign of Dupleix, it was
    regained.
❖   The French factory was established in Mahe in 1725.
❖   The French colony was established in Karaikal in 1739.
❖   The headquarters of the French was initially Surat which was later shifted to
    Pondicherry.
Objectives of the French Company:-
❖   The main objective of the French to come to India was trade and commerce. From
    the time of their arrival in India till 1741, the main objective of the French, like the
    British, was completely commercial.



                                          BPSC
                                                                                            5




❖   With the passage of time, the objectives of the French also started changing and they
    started considering India as one of their colonies.
❖   In 1741, Joseph Francois Dupleix was made the governor of the French East India
    Company. During his time, the political objectives of the company became clearly
    visible and at times, they were given more importance than the commercial
    objectives of the company.
❖   Dupleix was highly intelligent who took advantage of the mutual enmity of the local
    kings and on the strength of his cleverness and diplomacy, achieved a respected place
    in the Indian political scenario.
❖   Dupleix's army, under the leadership of Marquis de Bussy, captured the area between
    Hyderabad and Cape Comorin.
❖   In 1744, British officer Robert Clive came to India who later defeated Dupleix. After
    this defeat, Dupleix was called back to France in 1754.
Battle of Wandiwash and decline of French power:-
❖   The Battle of Wandiwash was fought between the British and the French in India on
    22 January 1760.
❖   This war was a part of the Third Carnatic War.
❖   In this war, the French army was led by Comte de Lally and the British army was
    led by Sir Eyre Coote.
❖   In this war, the British defeated the French decisively, which helped in establishing
    British dominance in India.


                                          




                                           BPSC
                                                                                                                  6




                                                 BPSC
                                  MODERN HISTORY
                                                                                                 DMP - 06
                                          Model Answer
1.   Write a short note on the circumstances of the arrival of the Dutch Company in India and its
     contribution.                                                                      (8 Marks)
     Ans:-

     Approach:-
     ❖   Introduction:- Write briefly about the circumstances of the arrival of the Dutch Company in India.
     ❖   Main Body:- Write about the contribution of Dutch company in India.
     ❖   Conclusion:- Conclude the answer by writing a concise conclusion.

     Dutch (Netherlands) traders arrived in India during a period of European trade, when India was a major
     center of world trade, with products such as spices, silk, cotton, and indigo. The Dutch were the second
     European traders to arrive in India, after the Portuguese.
     Circumstances of arrival:
     ❖ Establishment of East India Company: The Dutch established the Dutch East India Company (VOC)
       in 1602 AD, whose objective was to trade with the countries of Asia.
     ❖ Demand for spices: Indian spices (pepper, cloves, nutmeg, cinnamon, etc.) were in high demand in
       Europe. The Dutch turned to India to break the Portuguese monopoly.
     ❖ Political circumstances: During the Mughal rule, India enjoyed internal stability and trade
       opportunities, which facilitated trade for foreign traders.
     ❖ Competition from the Portuguese: To counter Portuguese trade, the Dutch expanded their influence
       along the sea routes and established trading posts along the Indian coast.
     Contribution of the Dutch in India
     ❖ Establishment of trading centres: The Dutch established trading centres at places like Masulipatnam
       (Andhra Pradesh), Pulicat (Tamil Nadu), Surat, Hooghly (West Bengal), Chinsura, and Nagarampatnam
       etc.
     ❖ The Dutch traded cotton, indigo, silk, rice and opium with India.
     ❖ The Dutch exported heavily from the Coromandel coast.
     ❖ The Dutch made Indian cloth a major export item.
     ❖ The Dutch introduced their gold-made “Pagoda” coin in Pulicat.
     ❖ Although their influence was limited compared to that of the British, remnants of Dutch architecture and
       culture can still be seen in some areas (especially coastal South India).




                                                   BPSC
                                                                                                              7



The Dutch's arrival in India was primarily commercial. They contributed to the development of India's
overseas trade and maritime routes, but they failed to establish a lasting political influence. By the 18th
century, their influence had ended after they were defeated by the British.



                                                




                                PW Web/App: https://smart.link/7wwosivoicgd4




                                              BPSC
